                 The TCP/IP Internet DOOM FAQ
               by Scott Coleman (asre@uiuc.edu)
             and Jay Cotton (jay@calc.vet.uga.edu)
                        updated 4/8/95
                           

                         Introduction

        id Software's DOOM, DOOM II, and Heretic truly are
   the Killer Apps of the MS-DOS world. The popularity of
   these games is so immense, it has been estimated that
   DOOM is installed on more PCs than OS/2 and Windows NT
   combined. So many copies of these games have been sold
   that the idGuys can commute to work in Ferarris. Interest
   in these games has been so great that they have been
   hacked, reverse-engineered, dissected, and enhanced more
   than any other games in PC history. And now, as more and
   more people become hooked into the Internet, DOOM-engine
   games are rapidly becoming the Killer Apps of the 'net,
   as well. Although the remainder of this document will
   refer exclusively to DOOM, the procedures outlined here
   will work equally well for either DOOM II or Heretic, as
   well.

        DOOM, as released by id, only supports IPX network
   or modem/direct serial link play; TCP/IP networks are not
   supported. As a result, the DOOM documentation doesn't
   include any information about DOOMing across the
   Internet, and obviously DOOMers can't call id for help.
   As a result, the following question is asked at least
   once per week in the DOOM newsgroups: "How do I play DOOM
   over the Internet?" In the pages that follow, we will
   attempt to answer the most frequently asked questions
   about Internet DOOM, including what you need, how to set
   it up, and how to find new fragbait - er, I mean,
   opponents.

        DOOM across the Internet is made possible by a
   freeware program called iFrag (formerly called iDOOM).
   iFrag uses the UDP protocol to send DOOM game information
   between multiple machines on the Internet. By some
   strange coincidence, the authors of this document are
   also the creators of iFrag, and we have used the program
   to play Internet DOOM sessions with opponents from as far
   away as Estonia. In writing this FAQ, we hope that
   sharing some of our experience will make it easier for
   you to get connected in your own Internet DOOM sessions. 


                       The Frag Tracker

        The Frag Tracker is a major new enhancement to the
   Internet DOOMing experience. Based on the premise that
   the ability to play DOOM over the 'net isn't much good
   unless you have other people with whom to play, the Frag
   Tracker serves as a virtual meeting place for Internet
   DOOMers. Frag Tracker support is built right into iFrag -
   its use is completely transparent. People looking for
   games run iFrag in client mode, which automatically
   queries the Frag Tracker for a listing of registered
   games. The type of game (DOOM, DOOM II, or Heretic), the
   names of the players, the game parameters (episode, map,
   skill level, etc.), and other information is displayed on
   the iFrag screen. The player picks a game from this list
   and she is instantly connected to that game. If there are
   no games waiting, or the existing games aren't
   sufficiently interesting, a player can register a new
   iFrag game on the Frag Tracker which others can then
   join.


                        Getting Prepared

        Q1: I want to play DOOM over the Internet using
   iFrag. What hardware do I need?

        To successfully play DOOM across the Internet, you
   will need the following hardware:

        * A machine capable of playing DOOM (D'OHH!) 

        * If your site is directly connected to the
        Internet, you'll need a network interface card (NIC)
        for your machine. And not just any old NIC, mind you
        - your NIC must be supported by a packet driver if
        you wish to use it to play Internet DOOM. Usually
        this means that your NIC must be an ethernet card,
        although iFrag has been successfully played over
        token ring. We will assume that your PC is already
        equipped with a suitable NIC, although it may
        currently be in use for some other non-TCP/IP
        function (such as a node on a Novell network). As
        long as your NIC is supported by a standard packet
        driver, your machine can be readily converted into
        an iFrag "playstation."

        * If you are not directly connected, you'll need a
        28.8Kbps modem (V.34 or V.FC) as well as an ISP
        (Internet Service Provider) with suitable dialup
        facilities. NOTE: If you have a 14.4Kbps (V.32bis)
        or slower modem, don't waste your time trying to
        play DOOM over it via a SLIP connection. It is,
        quite simply, unplayable. Go invest in a faster
        modem or, better still, an inexpensive ethernet
        card.
              

        Q2: OK, I've got all the hardware. What software do
   I need? 
                  
        In addition to the hardware requirements, some
   software is also required to complete your setup. Before
   you can play, you'll need to pick up the following:

        * The latest version of DOOM.  At the time of this
        writing, the latest version of DOOM is 1.9, DOOM II
        is 1.9, and Heretic is 1.0. It's always best to use
        the latest version of each game because that is what
        the majority of other iFraggers will be using, and
        different versions of each game cannot be used in
        the same network game. Additionally, DOOM versions
        1.1 and below are incapable of using iFrag.

        * A packet driver written specifically for your NIC.
        The Packet Driver is a standardized interface that
        lets iFrag (and therefore DOOM) "talk" to your NIC.
        If you're connecting via modem, you'll need a SLIP
        packet driver. 

        * iFrag, the TCP/IP network driver for DOOM.  

        * Some basic network diagnostic tools, such as a
        PING or TRACEROUTE program. These are not absolutely
        necessary, but can definitely be useful for
        debugging and testing your setup. 

        Q3: Hold on - I don't have some of this software!
   Where can I get it?

        * To obtain iFrag: Log on to mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu
        via anonymous ftp. Change to directory /asre.
        Download the file iFrag21.ZIP. This is version 2.1
        of iFrag, the latest as of this writing. 

        * Many ethernet cards come with the appropriate
        packet drivers on a utilities diskette packaged with
        the card. If your card does not come with a packet
        driver, there is an excellent collection of freely
        available packet drivers called the Crynwr (nee
        Clarkson) Packet Driver collection. You can obtain
        it via anonymous ftp from oak.oakland.edu. Change to
        the /pub/msdos/pktdrvr subdirectory and download
        PKTD11.ZIP and PKTD11C.ZIP. You need not download
        the files PKTD11A.ZIP and PKTD11B.ZIP; these contain
        source code and example programs for the packet
        drivers - while interesting (especially to
        programmer types), you won't need these in order to
        play iFrag. Modem users should grab the file
        slippr15.zip from this directory. NOTE: Make sure
        that you do NOT get "slipr15d.zip" by mistake!

        * If you need basic network diagnostic utilities,
        the WATTCP applications are freely available and
        include a PING program. To get them, anonymous ftp
        to dorm.rutgers.edu, change to the
        /pub/msdos/wattcp/ subdirectory, and download the
        file APPS.ZIP.
                  
        Q4: OK, I've got everything, now what do I do to set
   it up? 

        Setting your computer up to use the TCP/IP protocol
   suite via a packet driver is very straightforward. This
   next section will illustrate the procedure for setting up
   a PC with an SMC ethernet card and the IP address
   128.192.23.5. Modem+SLIP users can skip ahead to the next
   section, which describes the analogous procedure for
   dialup SLIP users. You'll of course need to substitute
   your own specific information in place of the examples
   given here. All set? OK, let's get started.

                   Ethernet Setup Procedure

        Step 0: START WITH A CLEAN BOOT!!!!! Set up your
   CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT files to load as few drivers
   as possible. Some definite things to EXclude are memory
   managers (HIMEM, EMM386, QEMM, etc.) and network drivers
   (e.g. LSL, IPXODI). DOOM doesn't need the former, and the
   latter will probably conflict with the packet driver. We
   recommend that you prepare an alternate configuration
   (using the multiple configuration facility built into MS-
   DOS; see your DOS manual for details) specifically for
   Internet DOOM with a CONFIG.SYS portion containing only a
   FILES=20 line, and an AUTOEXEC.BAT portion containing
   only the line "prompt=$p$g". Be sure to include the line
   which loads your mouse driver (if you play DOOM using a
   mouse).

        Step 1: Set up the packet driver. If you do not
   already have a suitable packet driver installed on your
   machine, now is the time to install one. Start by
   determining your ethernet card's IRQ setting, it's base
   I/O port setting, and it's memory address setting (if
   any). You should be able to determine this by looking at
   the card itself and consulting the user manual. You'll
   need some if not all of this information, depending upon
   which packet driver you use and/or type of hardware you
   have (for example, some IBM computers with the
   MicroChannel bus can determine the settings on the card
   automatically without you having to supply them on the
   packet driver command line). Unzip the appropriate driver
   from Crynwr Packet Driver collection archive. In our
   example, the packet driver is called SMC_WD.COM. By
   looking at the jumpers on the card and consulting the
   manual, I determined that the card has been set to IRQ 7,
   Base I/O port address 300h, and the base memory address
   is at segment d800h. For this example, I have chosen to
   use interrupt 60h for the packet driver. Packet drivers
   typically operate on an interrupt in the range of 60h to
   80h inclusive; since nothing else in my sample system
   happens to be using the first available interrupt (INT
   60h), I chose that. Thus, to load my packet driver, I use
   the command line


        SMC_WD 0x60 0x7 0x300 0xd800

   where 0x60 is the packet driver interrupt, 0x7 is the IRQ
   setting on the card, 0x300 is the I/O port base address,
   and 0xd800 is the memory base address (NOTE: all numbers
   are in C-style HEX notation). Don't worry if you don't
   understand what all this stuff means - as long as you use
   the correct numbers, your packet driver should work.
   NOTE: If your PC is currently part of a Novell network
   (e.g. Netware, Netware Lite, Personal Netware) the
   parameters you need can be found in a file called
   NET.CFG, usually located in your \NOVELL, \NWLITE or
   \NWCLIENT subdirectories (along with all the other
   drivers needed by Novell). Add the proper command line to
   the AUTOEXEC.BAT for your iFrag configuration so that the
   packet driver will be loaded automatically whenever you
   boot using the iFrag partition.

        When successfully loaded, the packet driver should
   give a sign on message and report the ethernet address of
   your NIC when you load it. Chances are that if your NIC
   has been functioning properly for other tasks (e.g. as a
   node on a Novell network) then you'll have no problems
   here. If not, or if there are any error or warning
   messages, something is wrong. One possibility is that one
   of the settings on your NIC is in conflict with those of
   another expansion card in your system. No two cards can
   have the same IRQ, I/O port, or memory address settings,
   nor can the memory areas of two cards overlap. Whatever
   the cause, you'll need to find and correct the problem
   before continuing.

        Step 2: Set up a new directory where iFrag and all
   its configuration files will be kept. You can name this
   directory anything you like (I suggest c:\iFrag). UnZIP
   the ifrag21.zip file into this new directory, and make it
   the default (chdir to it). We will refer to this
   directory as the "iFrag directory."

        Step 3: Set up your WATTCP.CFG file. Your WATTCP.CFG
   file contains important parameters used by the WATTCP
   TCP/IP kernel built into iFrag. These values MUST be
   entered correctly if you wish to make a connection with
   another DOOM PC. In preparation for this, you'll need
   several bits of information. Contact the network
   administrator for your site and find out the IP address
   for your machine, the IP address for your gateway or
   router, the IP address of at least one Domain Name Server
   local to your site, and your netmask value. The three IP
   addresses will each consist of four groups of digits
   separated by periods. In our example, the machine's IP
   address is 128.192.23.5, the gateway is 128.192.23.1, the
   netmask is 255.255.255.0, and the nameserver address is
   128.192.44.67. NOTE: it is important to use the numeric
   IP addresses, not the actual host names. NOTE: If you
   have other Internet programs currently installed on your
   machine, such as a Gopher client or the Trumpet
   newsreader, you can probably find the information you
   need in the configuration files used for those programs.
   If the application is based on the Waterloo TCP package,
   it will have it's own WATTCP.CFG, in which case you can
   simply copy it over to your iFrag directory. When you
   have collected all this information, use your favorite
   ASCII text editor to edit the WATTCP.CFG file in your
   iFrag directory. Edit or add the lines beginning with
   my_ip=, gateway=, nameserver=, and netmask=. On our
   example machine, the WATTCP.CFG file looks like this:

   my_ip=128.192.23.5
   gateway=128.192.23.1
   netmask=255.255.255.0
   nameserver=128.192.44.67

        Save the changed file and exit back to DOS.

        Some sites run what is called a BOOTP server. If
   yours is such a site, you can put "BOOTP" on the "my_ip="
   line and leave the other lines out. iFrag can contact the
   BOOTP server and determine all the settings it needs to
   communicate with other machines on the Internet. If your
   site is not running a BOOTP server, then your task is a
   little more difficult (but not impossible!)

        If you know your machine's IP address, but you can't
   determine the other values, you can often get away with
   some educated guesswork. For instance, the gateway for a
   subnet usually has an IP address ending in .1, as is the
   case with our example. Thus, if your IP address is
   xxx.yyy.zzz.www, try setting your gateway's IP address to
   xxx.yyy.zzz.1. As for the subnet mask, a common value for
   this parameter is 255.255.255.0. In some cases, the
   gateway value can be something like xxx.yyy.1.1 with a
   corresponding netmask value of 255.255.0.0 - if one
   doesn't work, it can't hurt to try the other. Finally, if
   you don't know your nameserver's IP address, you can
   probably get by without it for the purposes of DOOM
   playing. Since you'll be specifying IP addresses for all
   of your opponents' machines, a nameserver lookup won't be
   necessary to resolve their addresses. 

        Your basic setup is now complete. Please skip ahead
   to the section on testing your TCP/IP setup.


                     SLIP Setup Procedure

        This procedure assumes that you are using the
   cslipper SLIP driver mentioned earlier. If you are using
   a different driver, you'll need to change the commands
   which follow accordingly.

        Step 0: Obtain Internet access from a service
   provider who allows SLIP/PPP connections on their
   terminal server. A "shell account" (where you log in to a
   remote UNIX host and type commands such as "telnet" and
   "ftp") will NOT work. How to obtain this type of service
   from such a provider is beyond the scope of this
   document.

        Step 1: Using your favorite serial communications
   package, dial in to your service provider, log in, and
   issue whatever commands are required to change their
   terminal server to SLIP mode. How this is done varies
   from service provider to service provider and is beyond
   the scope of this document. Check with your service
   provider for more details.

        Once you have logged on and enabled SLIP mode, exit
   your telecommunications software WITHOUT HANGING UP -
   this is VERY IMPORTANT! Any telecommunications package
   worth the floppy it comes on will have a "save without
   hangup" command, or will prompt you when you exit to ask
   whether it should hang up or not.

        Change to the directory where you have installed
   your packet driver and load it. An example command line
   for CSLIPPER is 

           CSLIPPER com1 vec=0x60 baud=57600

   where com1 is the serial port to which your modem is
   connected, 0x60 is the interrupt vector the packet driver
   should use, and 57600 is the baud rate. The packet driver
   will display a signon message and load itself into
   memory.

        Your SLIP packet driver is now loaded and ready for
   testing.

                   Testing your TCP/IP Setup
        Step 1: Reboot your machine and select your new
   iFrag configuration. Next, use your network diagnostic
   programs to test the connection. For example, if you are
   using the WATTCP application suite mentioned earlier,
   unzip the TCPINFO and PING programs from the WATTCP apps
   archive into your iFrag directory. At the DOS prompt,
   type:

             TCPINFO    

   and press the <Enter> key. If your WATTCP.CFG values are
   set up correctly, and if your packet driver and net
   connection are functional, you'll see a couple of screens
   of information about your system, including your ethernet
   address and the parameters you specified in the
   WATTCP.CFG file. 

        If everything looks OK, the next step is to use the
   PING program to attempt to establish contact with your
   subnet gateway. At the DOS prompt, type

        PING <yourgateway's.numeric.ip.address>

   and press the <Enter> key. After a brief delay, you
   should see a message telling you that the host is
   responding, as well as the round trip time for PING's
   test packets. If you see the "Timeout" error message,
   then something is wrong with your setup; if your PC is
   unable to reach your gateway, it will be unable to reach
   the rest of the Internet as well, since all network
   packets which are sent to nodes outside of your local
   area network must pass through your gateway. For our
   sample system, we would type:

             ping 128.192.23.1

   If your gateway PING was successful, try PINGing your
   Domain Name Server (at the IP address you specified in
   WATTCP.CFG) as well as some well-known site on the
   internet (e.g. the Frag Tracker, which is at IP address
   128.174.134.150). These will test your machine's ability
   to connect with other machines outside of your subnet as
   well as those outside of your site. All of these PINGs
   should result in a "host responding" message with a round
   trip time. If any of these attempts fails, recheck your
   entries in WATTCP.CFG and/or get some help from your
   network administrator. Examples for our test system:

        ping 128.192.44.67

   and

        ping 128.174.134.150


        Step 2: Set up your iFrag.CFG. Again using your
   preferred ASCII text editor, modify the iFrag.CFG file in
   your iFrag directory so that all entries are correct for
   your system. You will need to specify the paths to your
   game and patch WAD directories, your chosen nickname (the
   name by which other iFrag players will know you), the
   number of lines you want on your video display (25 or
   50), whether or not you want stealth (no sound) mode,
   etc. As an example, let's suppose Joe Ayedume has chosen
   the nickname FragLord, and that he has installed DOOM,
   DOOM II, and Heretic into their standard directories on
   his hard disk. The iFrag.CFG file for Joe's system will
   look something like this:

   ;
   ; Sample iFrag Configuration File
   ;

   ; stealth
   nick=FragLord
   realname=Joe Ayedume
   location=Redmond, WA, USA
   password=secret
   tracker=128.174.134.150,6666
   doom=c:\doom
   doom2=c:\doom2
   heretic=c:\heretic
   doompwads=c:\doom\wads
   doom2pwads=c:\doom2\wads
   hereticpwads=c:\heretic\wads
   videolines=50

        Edit your iFrag.CFG file to reflect your nickname as
   well as the locations of your games and PWADs. If you
   don't have one of the games installed, just leave the
   corresponding entries blank. Save the changed file back
   to disk.


            Put Me in, Coach - I'm Ready to Play! 

        All right! iFrag is now installed and ready for
   carnage! Now all I need are some more players to sink my
   rockets into. From my iFrag directory, I start iFrag by
   typing

   iFrag

   and pressing the <ENTER> key. The iFrag client-mode
   screen comes up, and iFrag contacts the Internet Frag
   Tracker to see which games are waiting for players at the
   moment. Once iFrag has successfully contacted the Frag
   Tracker and downloaded the list of available games, a
   pop-up dialog box appears on the screen. Using the PgUp
   and PgDn keys, I can view a summary of each available
   game. This game summary includes the type of game (DOOM,
   DOOM II, or Heretic), the nicknames of all the players
   currently in the game, the location of the machine
   hosting the game, a brief description, as well as the
   current game settings (skill, episode, map, etc.). I
   notice that my friend (who is known only as "ArchVile")
   is currently hosting a game of Heretic. Since it's been a
   while since I have turned him into a chicken, I press the
   <ENTER> key to select his game. iFrag immediately
   contacts ArchVile's machine and I join the game.

        ArchVile is running iFrag in server mode. This makes
   ArchVile the coordinator for this particular game - he is
   the "boss," and gets to decide which game will be played
   (DOOM, DOOM II, or Heretic as in this case) as well as
   which parameters to set (such as episode, map, skill
   level, which PWADs to use, and so forth). ArchVile also
   decides who may be allowed to join the game and when the
   game will begin. Although the other players in the game
   may voice their opinions, only the server has the ability
   to actually make changes to the game settings. In a sense
   it's just like watching TV - although there may be four
   people watching, only one person can have the remote
   control.

        Now that I have successfully joined a game, the
   iFrag chat mode screen appears. This screen is divided
   into several sections: the credits, the output window,
   the status bar, and the input line. At the top of the
   screen is the name of the program, its version number,
   and the copyright notice. The large area beginning with
   the second screen line is the output window. Here is
   where iFrag will display all status messages as well as
   the chat text entered by the other players. Below the
   output window is the status bar, where the current game
   settings are displayed. Below the status bar is the input
   line where all the text I type on my keyboard will
   appear. Finally, the bottom line of the screen lists
   significant contributors to iFrag. During this phase of
   the game setup, all players who have connected thus far
   can type messages to each other using iFrag's built-in
   chat facility. To send a message to the other players in
   the game, I simply type a message on the keyboard. My
   keystrokes appear in the input line at the bottom of the
   screen, and when I press <ENTER>, the text will be echoed
   to the screens of all players (along with my nickname to
   indicate that I sent the message). The server itself will
   also send messages. Messages from the server will begin
   with three asterisks ("***") to distinguish them from
   messages typed by other players.

        In addition to sending text messages, iFrag's chat
   facility also understands several commands, each
   beginning with a slash '/' character. Some examples of
   iFrag chat mode commands are /who, /quit, and /help.

        When my iFrag client connects to the iFrag server,
   it automatically receives the game parameters which will
   be used during this session. These game settings are
   displayed on the status bar in an abbreviated form to
   ensure that they will all fit within the available space.

        The server announces my arrival, and ArchVile greets
   me by typing "re" (short for "re Hi," i.e. "Hi again"). I
   reply with a "re" of my own. Gazing down at my status
   bar, I notice that he has selected E1M8 as the default
   episode and map for our game. I remind him that we've
   been playing that one a lot lately, and suggest that we
   play something else. "How about hl9.wad?" he asks,
   referring to the PWAD (user-written level) which is a
   Heretic DEATHMATCH level based on the famous DOOM
   "Ledges" PWAD. I agree, and he issues the commands and
   "/map 1" and "/pwads hl9.wad" to incorporate the new
   level. Our status lines are immediately updated to
   reflect these changes.
    
        Once all players have joined the game and all
   parameters have been set, ArchVile presses the F10 key.
   The iFrag server signals the clients that the game is
   beginning, the chat facility is shut down, and iFrag sets
   up the connections which will be used for the actual
   game. Once these network links are established between
   all the machines, the message "Prepare to meet your
   DOOM!" is displayed, and iFrag launches the appropriate
   game. We see the usual Heretic startup information, and
   then there we are, in HL9.WAD, crystal wands charged and
   ready! 

        After dining heartily on Chicken Flambe' (courtesy
   of a Morph Ovum, a Phoenix Rod, and a Tome of Power), I
   decide to fire up my own game with a little scenario I
   call "Carnage-DOOM." From the DOS prompt, I type 

   iFrag -server

   and press <ENTER>. Since I like this particular scenario
   quite a bit, I created a standard DOOM response file
   called "carnage.rsp" containing the parameters -doom2, -
   warp 1, -deathmatch, -nomonsters, and -skill 5. I use
   iFrag's /load command to load the response file by typing
   /load carnage.rsp, and my status bar is updated with the
   new settings. After a few moments, NoOne, Caitiff, and
   FragMastr join my game. After exchanging a few
   jocularities, I confirm that everyone is ready to begin
   and then I press the F10 key. DOOM II loads, and I grab
   the rocket launcher for the first of many fabulously fun
   frags.

        That's all there is to it! Gone are the days of long
   command lines with 4 IP addresses and tons of other
   parameters, setting up games via email, and other
   frustrations. Now getting into a game of Internet DOOM is
   as easy as getting fragged with a BFG-9000!



                 iFrag/Frag Tracker Etiquette
                        
        The Frag Tracker was intended to provide a pleasant
   meeting place for DOOM players from all over the
   Internet. However, there is an unfortunate human tendency
   to behave both more aggressively and less politely
   towards others over a cyberspace link than one would
   behave face-to-face. In an attempt to help counteract
   this tendency, we urge you to employ the following
   guidelines in your use of the Frag Tracker. These
   guidelines stem from the common courtesies and politeness
   we extend to each other in everyday life. Think of the
   server of an iFrag game as being the host of a small get-
   together. This person has invited you into their home
   (virtual home in the case of iFrag) for a game of DOOM.
   While connected to their iFrag server, behave as you
   would if you were a guest in their home (and as you would
   like others to behave in your own home). Have some
   consideration for the other players and everyone will
   enjoy their gaming even more. On the other hand, severe
   and/or repeated violations of these guidelines may result
   in revocation of Tracker access privileges.

        1. Do NOT use abusive or vulgar language in public. 
   Type /freeze or /notrack (or both) if you want a private
   chat.  Do not put vulgar or abusive language in your game
   description. 

        2. Do NOT falsify information in ifrag.cfg.  Anyone
   not reporting their real name, location, or email address
   may have their Tracker access privileges revoked.

        3. Do not kick someone out of your game before first
   asking that person to leave. One exception to this is if
   they don't respond to your "hello" within several seconds
   (in violation of item 7 below); in that case, feel free
   to kick or ban them at will. ;-)

        4. If you are in an iFrag game setup on the tracker
   and you are asked to leave, do so. While the server
   player should be polite in his request, he is under no
   obligation to allow any particular player to join or   
   remain in his game. Usually the server player will ask
   another player to leave because that player's packet
   latency, or "ping" time, is high enough that it would
   cause playability of the game to suffer. Don't take it
   personally; just find another game involving machines to
   which you are better connected. 

        5. If you decide you do not want to play a game
   after it has been launched, do not press alt-x to get out
   of the game - this will prevent ALL the players from
   loading. It's a simple courtesy to wait for the game to
   begin before leaving; at that point, your departure will
   not prevent the other players from continuing their game.

        6. If the game appears to be hung while loading, be
   sure to wait at least 60 seconds before aborting.  Some
   computers are slower than others when loading all the
   doom data at the start of the game. This may be caused by
   something as simple as a fragmented hard drive. In any
   case, aborting too soon is decidedly uncool (just as it
   is in item 5).

        7. It is rude to join a game and then leave without
   saying something. If you join a game, and see that your
   connection is poor, at least say something like "Oops!
   Sorry, I was looking for a better connection than I have
   with you. Later!" Think how you would feel if someone
   walked up to your home, rang your doorbell, then when you
   opened the door they simply looked at you, turned, and
   walked away without saying a word. It's enough to make
   Judith Martin shudder.

        8. If you are serving a game in which you want only
   certain players to join, be sure to put that info in the
   game description (use the "/desc" command).

        9. When enough players have joined a game, give some
   time to be sure that:
      - Everyone has a chance to see and comment on the game
   parameters;
        - Everyone has or has successfully transferred the
   PWAD (if one is selected);
      - All players have a pretty good idea of what their
   ping time is;
        - All discussions related to the pending game are
   concluded.
        10. Make sure you know where you are in the ping
   time "pecking order." If the game lags and you have the
   worst ping, leave the game. Slowing a game down is very
   bad form! There will always be other games for you to
   play; don't be selfish and ruin things for the other
   players.


                    Other Pointers and Tips

        First, try not to use the "pause" key. Do NOT use
   the pause key just so you can type a message. Do NOT use
   the pause key if you have to answer the phone; either
   find a hiding place to hole up, or if you are fragged,
   just stay dead (don't hit the spacebar) until your call
   is completed. It's inconsiderate to make everyone else
   wait just because *you* decided to stop playing and take
   a phone call. If someone else has paused the game, do NOT
   release the pause - let the person who paused release it.
   Before releasing pause, the original pauser should first
   check to make sure everyone else is ready to begin
   playing again. People tend to get angry when an
   unexpected pause release causes them to become easy
   fragbait for another player. It's also really annoying to
   play against people who like to pause just when they're
   about to be shot.  Argh!

        Second, DO type messages. If you notice a sudden
   increase in game speed, another player may have aborted
   or crashed. You might end up playing by yourself if you
   are not alert... Type a message and see if your opponents
   are still in the game. If you can monitor network traffic
   (I have a repeater nearby that gets very busy when I
   play), notice the difference between the amount of
   traffic when connected and disconnected. 

        Third, Internet games will sometimes self abort with
   error messages. Don't panic, just restart iFrag.
   Sometimes one of the computers will lock up - again, just
   restart. If you get tired of restarting (this doesn't
   happen much), just walk away! It's just a game!

        Last, hope for a fast connection. This isn't always
   a problem, but when the connection is slow, the game
   sucks! There's nothing you can do about it. Sometimes the
   game will speed up and slow down throughout the match. 
   Such is the Internet. Re-connection will not help. Every
   packet that is sent back and forth picks a new path;
   sometimes it's a fast path, and sometimes not.


                        A Final Thought

        Fragging your friends across the Internet with DOOM,
   DOOM II, and Heretic can be VERY addictive. Have fun, but
   don't lose your "real" life just to play a game!
